# Guardrails vs Speed Bumps

One thing I consider when looking at adding or optimizing team processes (though the idea could apply to UX as well) is whether the individual step in the process is there as a guardrail or a speed bump. I think all too often steps are added in a process with the idea that they are guardrails, when in fact they are speed bumps.

So what do I mean by guardrails and speed bumps? According the [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guard_rail), guardrails "are a boundary feature and may be a means to prevent or deter access to dangerous or off-limits areas". They're those great things along the highway that keep you from hitting trees if you fall asleep at the wheel, or are texting and driving. The other great thing about them is that you aren't constantly hitting them when you're doing what you're supposed to be doing, and this is the key difference I'm trying to highlight. Speed bumps are defined as "a class of traffic calming devices that use vertical deflection to slow motor-vehicle traffic in order to improve safety conditions" ([Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Speed_bump)). You are meant to hit speed bumps. They are there to slow you down, and the reduced speed you're moving at makes things safer.

If you have some sort of "guardrail" in your process that you are constantly hitting, call it what it is - a speed bump not a guardrail. That's also not saying that these steps that slow you down are always a bad thing, sometimes slowing down and moving deliberately is what you need to do. But as you try to optimize your team towards delivering working software in shorter timescales, removing unnecessary speed bumps or perhaps setting up true guardrails where there were once speed bumps can help to reduce your lead time for changes and overall cycle time.

Another thing to keep in mind as you're setting up or analyzing processes steps is the wholistic view of the entire process (yes it can be a lot). In larger companies a team may be responsible for only a portion of the development process and may not take into account speed bumps earlier in to process, or may try to put a guardrail in place without understanding the actual path of development and create a speed bump instead (hate to name names, but I'm looking at you InfoSec). That's not to say a team can't do this to themselves as well, but at least they should have the power to change their process. I would say ideally there would be someone (or a team) at a company looking at the holistic process of delivering software and trying to make it more efficient, but this is probably not the case in most places. Regardless, the people going through the process will know the pain points, _i.e._ annoying speed bumps, the best. As a developer you should bring these up, as a manager you should listen and look for these issues, and as a senior manager you should empower teams to request changes to processes put in place by other teams. After all, *our highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early and continuous delivery of valuable software*. How can you do that going down a development path full of speed bumps?
